The _ID token_ introduced by OpenID Connect is issued by the authorization server (the Microsoft identity platform) when the client application requests one during user authentication. The ID token enables a client application to verify the identity of the user and to get other information (claims) about them.

ID tokens are [JSON web tokens (JWT)](https://wikipedia.org/wiki/JSON_Web_Token) issued by the authorization server and contain claims that carry information about the user. ID tokens are intended to be understood by third-party applications and should not be used for authorization purposes.

# Claims in an ID token

These ID tokens consist of a:
- **header**: use to verify authenticity of the token (see [Header claims](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/active-directory/develop/id-tokens#header-claims))
- **payload**: contains the information about the user (see [Payload claims](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/active-directory/develop/id-tokens#payload-claims))
- **signature**: use to verify authenticity of the token.

# Using claims to reliably identify a user (Subject and Object ID)

To correctly store information per-user, use:
- `oid`: The immutable identifier for an object in the Microsoft identity system, in this case, a user account,
- `sub`: The principal about which the token asserts information, such as the user of an app,
- `tid`: Represents the tenant that the user is signing in to.

# ID token lifetime

By default, an ID token is valid for one hour - after one hour, the client must acquire a new ID token.

# Validating an ID token

Validating an ID token is check whether the token has been tampered with

- Timestamps: the `iat`, `nbf`, and `exp` timestamps should all fall before or after the current time, as appropriate.
- Audience: the `aud` claim should match the app ID for your application.
- Nonce: the `nonce` claim in the payload must match the nonce parameter passed into the /authorize endpoint during the initial request.

It can also validate the issuer to ensure that the correct issuer has sent back the token.

>[!warning]  
>Public applications (code running entirely on a device or network you don't control such as a user's browser or their home network) don't benefit from validating the ID token. This is because a malicious user can intercept and edit the keys used for validation of the token.

---
tags: #identity  
refs:
- https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/active-directory/develop/id-tokens#payload-claims
