Access tokens are used by web APIs to perform authentication and authorization and therefore enable clients to securely call protected web APIs. Access tokens are opaque strings without a set format because the contents of the token are intended for the API only.

For validation and debugging purposes _only_, developers can decode JWTs using a site like [jwt.ms](https://jwt.ms/).

When the client requests an access token, the Microsoft identity platform also returns some metadata including the expiry time of the access token and the scopes for which it's valid.

# Access token lifetime

The default lifetime of an access token is a random value ranging between 60-90 minutes (75 minutes on average)., When the access token expires, the client must use the refresh token to silently acquire a new refresh token and access token.

The lifetime of an access token can be adjusted to control how often the client application expires the application session, and how often it requires the user to reauthenticate (either silently or interactively)

# Validate tokens

Web APIs must validate access tokens sent to them by a client. They must only accept tokens containing their `aud` claim.

If the application needs to validate an ID token or an access token, it should first validate the signature of the token and the issuer against the values in the OpenID discovery document.

## Validating the signature

From the header segment of a JWT :

``` json
{
  "typ": "JWT",
  "alg": "RS256",
  "x5t": "iBjL1Rcqzhiy4fpxIxdZqohM2Yk",
  "kid": "iBjL1Rcqzhiy4fpxIxdZqohM2Yk"
}
```

The `alg` claim indicates the algorithm that was used to sign the token, while the `kid` claim indicates the particular public key that was used to validate the token.

Acquire the signing key data necessary to validate the signature by using the [OpenID Connect metadata document](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/active-directory/develop/v2-protocols-oidc#fetch-the-openid-configuration-document) located at:

```
https://login.microsoftonline.com/common/v2.0/.well-known/openid-configuration
```

There are many open-source libraries available for helping with signature validation if necessary.

# Claims based authorization

## Validate the token

Use the `aud` claim to ensure that the user intended to call the application. If the identifier of the resource isn't in the `aud` claim, reject it.

## Validate the user permission

- Use the `roles` and `wids` claims to validate that the user has authorization to call the API
- Check that the `tid` inside the token matches the tenant ID used to store the data in the API
	- When a user stores data in the API from one tenant, they must sign into that tenant again to access that data. Never allow data in one tenant to be accessed from another tenant
- Use the `amr` claim to verify the user has performed MFA. The enforcement of MFA is done using [Conditional Access](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/active-directory/conditional-access/overview). If `roles` or `groups` claims are requested in the access token, verify that the user is in the group allowed to do this action.
- Don't use `email` or `upn` claim values to determine whether the user in an access token should have access to data. Mutable claim values like these can change over time, making them insecure and unreliable for authorization.
- Use immutable claim values `tid` and `sub` or `oid` as a combined key for uniquely identifying the API's data and determining whether a user should be granted access to that data.
	- Good: `tid` + `sub`
	- Better: `tid` + `oid` - the `oid` is consistent across applications, so an ecosystem of applications can audit user access to data.

Don't use mutable, human-readable identifiers like `email` or `upn` for uniquely identifying data.

## Validate application sign-in

- Use the `scp` claim to validate that the user has granted the calling app permission to call your API.
- Ensure the calling client is allowed to call your API using the `appid` claim (for v1.0 tokens) or the `azp` claim (for v2.0 tokens).
    - You only need to validate these claims (`appid`, `azp`) if you want to restrict your web API to be called only by pre-determined applications (e.g., line-of-business applications or web APIs called by well-known frontends). APIs intended to allow access from any calling application do not need to validate these claims.

# User and application tokens

An application may receive tokens for a user or directly from an application through the client credentials flow. These app-only tokens indicate that this call is coming from an application and doesn't have a user backing it.

To detect app-only access tokens, add the `idtyp` claim to the `accessToken` field, and check for the value `app`.

# Token revocation

Refresh tokens can be invalidated or revoked at any time.

## Token timeouts

The lifetime of refresh tokens can be altered using the [token lifetime configuration](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/active-directory/develop/active-directory-configurable-token-lifetimes). Applications can encounter scenarios where the login server rejects a refresh token due to its age :
- **MaxInactiveTime**: the refresh token is no longer valid.
- **MaxSessionAge**: reauthentication is required after the time setted.

## Token revocations

Refresh tokens can be revoked by the server due to a change in credentials, or due to use or administrative action.

- Password expires
- Password changed by user
- User does SSPR (self-service password reset)
- Admin resets password
- User revokes their refresh tokens by using [PowerShell](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/powershell/module/azuread/revoke-azureadsignedinuserallrefreshtoken)
- Admin revokes all refresh tokens for a user by using [PowerShell](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/powershell/module/azuread/revoke-azureaduserallrefreshtoken)
- Single sign-out ([v1.0](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/active-directory/azuread-dev/v1-protocols-openid-connect-code#single-sign-out), [v2.0](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/active-directory/develop/v2-protocols-oidc#single-sign-out) ) on web

### Non-password-based

A _non-password-based_ login is one where the user didn't type in a password to get it. Examples of non-password-based login include:

-   Using your face with Windows Hello
-   FIDO2 key
-   SMS
-   Voice
-   PIN

---
tags: #identity  
refs:
- https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/active-directory/develop/access-tokens
